this all started with a picture I was
just messing around on the internet I
found this and I thought oh it's a
sturdy old English workbench very nice
it's a Nicholson but you know some of
the details they don't quite right
here's the Nicholson and it's pretty
different
the legs are flush with the aprons and
it's got these little triangular cuts
the stretchers are mortise into the legs
the top is big and flat my bench on the
other hand has some flimsy planking in
the middle it's too shallow to be a tool
well and there's this diagonal bit on
the side you don't see that in the
history books and there's no joinery
these things are put together with
fasteners for God's sake and I think we
all know that is no way to build a bench
and look if there had just been the one
bench I would have forgotten about it
but here's another and this one is even
weirder the workman has about twelve
inches in front of him and then the
bench just dissolves into nothing and so
what these are these are carpenters
benches I know I know the workmen would
make this on-site out of whatever
materials were around use it for a few
weeks during the project and then just
leave it and that would make total sense
except why are there so many of them
there are dozens of these things on the
internet which doesn't make any sense if
these were disposable benches for
on-site work only then they never would
have survived and if these were cheap
throwaway benches
then why does so many of them have
expensive cast-iron devices still
attached to them those things have
always been expensive and look at the
tool marks that's not a week's worth of
where it's decades worth at this point I
am utterly obsessed with this bench and
also totally confused
I find this this picture comes from a
book written in 1900 and the author
calls it a joiners bench okay fine
what's a jointer well it's a carpenter
who could also make doors build stairs
install sash windows do fine trim work
oh and also build furniture
and the author doesn't just tell us what
to call this bench he also recommends
that we make it and he's got an entire
chapter detailing how we might do that I
think I need to go get some wood so I
actually found a couple of books from
around 1900 and they all have variations
on this bench and recommend it as a
general carpentry and furniture making
bench that you can bang together out of
soft wood and fasteners all the books
agree on trestle construction so we're
gonna make two sub assemblies with legs
stretchers and braces all fit together
then those trestles will be the
foundation for building everything else
I've got my legs laid out on a flat part
of the floor with the worst face turned
inward this piece of 2 by 10 cooked
pretty badly while it was drying but
that doesn't matter for a part that's
going to be buried inside the bench I'll
just keep the cup against the legs where
it won't rock once everything is squared
up I lay down a bead of construction
adhesive and run in my fasteners hold on
construction adhesive I know this
product is unfamiliar to most
woodworkers and I know you're thinking
oh is that stronger than wood glue no
it's actually weaker which I know
doesn't make a lot of sense here's the
thing what glue is very strong but it's
also very brittle when it gets stressed
a lot it breaks
construction adhesive is meant to set up
and still retain a little bit of
elasticity which means that when it's
exposed to a lot of force or a quick
shock it moves a little bit and then it
comes back it doesn't snap it's also
specifically designed for applications
where you're joining soft wood together
with fasteners pretty much exactly what
we're doing here and of course if you'd
rather use wood glue or just use
fasteners it's your venture so far I've
been using my impact driver to run my
fasteners in but this is a hand tool
built I'm using a drill and a driver for
speed but you don't need a single
electron to make this bench just for fun
I ran a few fasteners with my bit brace
and it was amazing this clip is actual
speed and I didn't even pre-drill my
post
I'm just running the screws straight
and they're going like butter it's
effortless so go ahead and just use your
basic woodwork for humans tools it'll
hardly even slow you down to finish my
trestles I need to add diagonal braces
and I've got a piece of Douglas fir 2x4
clamped across my trestle at a 45 degree
angle I'll use a pencil to trace the
spots where it touches my legs and then
I'll use those marks to cut some fast
half lap joints this is the only joinery
you need for this bench and they are
dead simple to cut I'll rough cut my
ends to the correct angle and then use
my rail bud to saw down the shoulder
line then I can clamp the board on its
edge and rip the cheek cut this was my
first one so I had to trim the shoulder
a little bit with a chisel but the rest
of the joints I was able to use straight
off the saw this is another reason I'm
using construction adhesive it's good at
filling gaps where regular wood glue
needs things to be tightly fitted these
joints can be pretty rough and they'll
still work out fine oh and here's a
trick for assembly
don't fight with wobbly trestles while
you're adding the braces just put a
screw clamp at the base of the leg and
it'll stay upright I'll put a link to
these clamps as well as my fasteners
adhesive and everything else down in the
description now my trestles are done and
I can move on to the aprons which are
gonna give the bench a lot of its
stiffness here I'm testing this board
for twists and it doesn't have any but
it did cup pretty badly while it was
drying I actually bought this wood two
weeks ago and left it up on edge to dry
the wood was dead flat when I brought it
into the shop and it's annoying that it
moved so much but it would have been a
lot more annoying if I had built the
bench and then the wood had moved
especially with you to buy ten stock
make sure it has time to dry and get
acclimated to your shop oh and I had
this stock cut to length at the big-box
store when I bought it it's gonna save
me a ton of time and they didn't even
charge me for the cuts anyway the apron
closest to the user is going to get used
for a lot of work holding and it needs
to be flat so I'll throw the board up on
my low Roman bench clamp it down with my
butt and scrub plane the center of the
board until it's level with the edges it
can be a
challenging to build a bench if you
don't already have a bench but I built
this low Roman bench for 30 bucks and
once you build it it's much easier to
bootstrap yourself up to something
bigger like this joiners bench if you
feel like the bench in this video still
might be a little much for you start
with my thirty dollar bench it'll really
build your confidence once you have at
least one flat surface on your apron
board throw it across your trestles sit
on it and drill a big countersink for
your bolts I'm not using the bit brace
for fun here I actually find it much
more effective for drilling big shallow
holes using the slower and more
sensitive tool makes me a lot less
likely to drill too deep when the
counter sinks are done use those holes
to locate your bolt holes carry them
through the apron to the leg and then
bore through the leg now we can pound in
our carriage bolts now you might not be
familiar with the humble carriage bolt I
don't typically use fasteners in my wood
work either but these little things are
made specifically for heavy-duty
construction where you're using soft
wood like building a porch or a deck
they've got this little square part
right on the shank there what that does
is it allows the end of the bolt to grab
the wood so that when you spin a nut on
the other side this part doesn't spin
and you can torque it down with a wrench
and the whole thing goes together really
conveniently you don't have to hold the
other side with anything it grips the
wood for you these are actually
fantastic from big projects like the one
we're doing now installing these is very
simple you're gonna drill a hole that's
the exact same size as the bolt you're
using so these are 3/8 bolts and I'm
using 3/8 holes that's gonna create a
very tight fit and you're gonna have to
hammer them in I'm hammering these in
with a ball peen hammer which allows me
to flip the hammer around and use the
ball end to seat the heads down below
those counter sinks it's very easy to
put a nut and washer on the back end and
tighten these things up with just a
common box wrench or an adjustable style
crescent wrench it doesn't matter what
you use now another trick you might
consider is you might want to install
the top bolt on each assembly first then
stand the bench up and square the legs
I'm just using my big homie
square here and that allows me to get
everything really 90 degrees before I
install the second bolt that can be an
easy method of getting things really
tight and don't put any construction
adhesive on the legs that's gonna help
the bench to come apart later which
might be important now we can pull the
bench up on its feet and it's held
together pretty well but it's much too
wobbly the next priority is locking
things together and making the bench top
stiff
nobody's floor is perfect so grab a
couple pieces of straight stock and use
them as big winding sticks to check your
bench assembly for twist mine is clearly
low on one corner so I've made a wedge
of oak and I'm tapping that in under one
foot to even things out now I'm gonna
draw a notch in the center of each apron
saw down the sides and carefully remove
my waist I've scrubbed a piece of 2 by
10 flat and I'll set it into my notches
transfer the wormans and sawed them out
just using my cheap disposable handsaw
and again be careful with your waste
removal I call this piece the key
because it locks everything together I
hit all the glue surfaces with
construction adhesive and tap the piece
in your aiming for a tight fit here
although glue and fasteners will help a
lot
give the adhesive some time to dry cut
it flush and add a fastener underneath
the next thing is to keep the workbench
from racking or flexing out of square
while you're planing and sawing I'm
using this piece of 2x4 here to show the
kind of motion we're dealing with the
bolts will do a good job of keeping the
legs attached to the aprons but they
won't fight lateral force so we'll
prepare some braces made of 2x4 and just
insert them between the trestles and the
key again keep the adhesive off the legs
and the bench will still come apart if
you need to move it we also don't want
the legs pivoting in the other direction
so we'll add some blocks at the ends of
the apron
take your time making these components
we allow no rough work around here now
our bench has a structure that's really
stiff it's gonna fight twisting and
racking really effectively but there's
another problem we're gonna make the top
of our bench out of plain old 2 by 10
planking material and this looks pretty
be on camera but it's actually thin
compared to the material most people use
for woodworking benches and when you
have a thin softwood top there's an
obvious problem watch material like this
is very springy it's got a ton of Bounce
when you hit it with a mallet and we're
gonna be hitting our bench a lot because
we're gonna be chopping mortises
pounding nails doing stuff like that
we need the bench top to absorb that
force not bounce it back up at us that's
really inefficient now luckily I've got
a bunch of this 4x4 material left over
from making my legs in fact I have the
perfect amount to make a couple of ribs
that are gonna go in between the
trestles
and the key they're gonna stiffen up
that bench and make it absorb vibration
much more effectively installing these
is really just like installing the key
I'm gonna cut some notches I'm gonna
notch the ends of my four by fours and
I'm gonna put them in with construction
adhesive and a fastener now it's really
ideal with these if you get a nice tight
fit and you have to tap them in but if
that doesn't work out squirt it in some
extra construction adhesive and cross
your fingers you will probably be fine
the last problem is we want to make sure
the ends of our legs the feet are really
secured and they don't have a tendency
to kick in or out as we're using the
bench now a lot of these historical
joiners benches have diagonal braces not
just on the ends but also lengthwise and
that helps to immobilize the legs we're
gonna add that detail to our
construction but make it even better
than the historical examples the
undercarriage that we've designed has
the key and those parallel braces and
they make a nice little corner we can
take on long braces and sneak them right
up inside that corner where they're
braced against those parallel two by
fours and the key that's gonna lock them
in super tightly the other end of the
brace is half-lapped on the opposite
side and it's gonna lock in to the end
of the leg these pieces go in with
fasteners but no construction adhesive
from easy disassembly the shoulders on
the half lap joints will give a lot of
stability even with no glue now the
structure of my bench is complete and
spend a few minutes cleaning all the top
surfaces of the trestles ribs and key
flush with the edges of the aprons the
bench isn't even finished but you can
already see how stiff the construction
is it resists planing force from
different directions and stays solidly
in place when I've knocked down all the
high spots it's a snap to install planks
across the top of the bench as I was
building
I found the straightest and flattest
boards and I set them aside for the top
where flatness is most important my best
board is gonna go right in front of the
work area followed by my second-best
board in the middle my last one is
pretty badly twisted but I only need
half of this board anyway and ripping it
down the middle eliminates most of the
twists I'm installing these boards with
plain fasteners and no adhesive this
will make the top easy to replace as it
gets worn and damaged and I'll always be
able to pull the planks off and have
full access to the undercarriage of the
bench to make changes or add accessories
this construction style is incredibly
flexible if you need to modify your
bench in the future it's no problem
I'm also countersinking the screw holes
very deeply which will keep the heads of
the screws away from my plane irons
while I flatten the bench even picking
my flattest boards this is still rough
construction lumber and you should
expect the top to need some flattening
if you need a quick refresher on how to
do this I have a whole video on
flattening your bench with nothing but a
scrub plan and once you've got the top
all planed your basic bench is done
listen what I found this design on the
Internet
I didn't know what to think of it I sure
as hell didn't think I was gonna build
it but now that I have built it it's
pretty impressive honestly and I think
this might be kind of an important
historical design that's sort of gotten
lost because it's just screwed together
construction lumber but that means that
it's also really easy to build it might
be kind of the perfect bench for the
beginning or intermediate woodworker who
doesn't have a lot
and doesn't have a lot of skills I built
this whole bench
everything you see here wood fasteners
and adhesive about $100 and it was all
big-box store stuff that pretty much
anybody can get and it really wasn't
very complicated to make I mean the
worst thing you have to do is cut a half
lap joint and let me tell you any monkey
with a saw can cut a half lap joint it's
not difficult
this design is also very efficient here
let me show you something
okay so this wood here is everything
that's left over from the build process
one piece of plank and a couple little
scraps and this project used two four by
fours two two by tens and three two by
fours so the materials bill is very
small and it's an extremely efficient
use of materials you're not gonna have a
bunch of junk left sitting around and I
think I'm gonna take almost all of this
and incorporate it back into the bench
as I continue to improve it and modify
it but I already think I have a really
good idea so this is the part of the
video where I usually say hey I've got
plans for sale and I do have plans
they're basic but they're the exact same
plans that I used to build this bench
and instead of selling them I've got a
better idea I'm gonna give them away for
free because I would like you to build
this bench with me let's make this a
crowdsourced project and try to come up
with the absolute best bench we possibly
can I'm gonna do a whole series of
videos about this bench adding different
vices and fixtures and improving and
modifying it while I'm doing that go to
Rex Kruger comm slash store or click the
link down in the description
get your free set of plans build the
bench and then when you do put it up on
Instagram put it on YouTube tag it the
joiners bench and tag me at Rex Krueger
so I can see what you're doing and what
improvements you've made I want to see
how you've changed it and made it better
and then a couple of weeks or a month
down the line when I have the whole
thing figured out and I've incorporated
all the best suggestions then I'll have
a set of plans and I'll keep them really
affordable just like I always do
I think this bench could be amazing I
think it could be the perfect thing for
beginning woodworkers who don't have a
lot of skill and don't have a lot of
money but I also think it could be a
great community project so consider
doing this along with me I think it
could be a lot of fun I also do a lot of
fun things with my patrons because they
are the ones who make all of this stuff
possible they made they
Finch possible it took me a lot of time
to build and film this and pay for the
materials and my patrons made that
happen
so if you'd like to be a part of that go
on over at patreon.com slash Rex Kruger
and check out all the free rewards and
early access that I have just for my
patrons and look if you're just watching
this video if you're just along for the
ride that's totally fine with me thanks
for being here thanks for watching